TELCODOCS-1310 Rootless DPDK (#60840)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/nw-running-dpdk-rootless-tap.adoc

In OpenShift Container Platform version 4.14 and later, you can use non-privileged pods to run DPDK applications alongside the tap CNI plugin. To enable this functionality, you need to mount the `vhost-net` device by setting the `needVhostNet` parameter to `true` within the `SriovNetworkNodePolicy` object.

.DPDK and TAP example configuration
image::348_OpenShift_rootless_DPDK_0923.png[DPDK and TAP plugin]

.Prerequisites

* You have installed the OpenShift CLI (`oc`).
* You have installed the SR-IOV Network Operator.
* You are logged in as a user with `cluster-admin` privileges.
* Ensure that `setsebools container_use_devices=on` is set as root on all nodes.
+
[NOTE]
====
Use the Machine Config Operator to set this SELinux boolean.
====

.Procedure

. Create a file, such as `test-namespace.yaml`, with content like the following example:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: v1
kind: Namespace
metadata:
  name: test-namespace
  labels:
    pod-security.kubernetes.io/enforce: privileged
    pod-security.kubernetes.io/audit: privileged
    pod-security.kubernetes.io/warn: privileged
    security.openshift.io/scc.podSecurityLabelSync: "false"
----

> . Apply the yaml by running the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Apply the YAML by running the following command:
```

Or
> . Create the new `Namespace` object by running the following command:

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f test-namespace.yaml
----

> . Create the following `SriovNetworkNodePolicy` object, and then save the YAML in the `sriov-node-network-policy.yaml` file:

Reviewer: In the other steps, this step is to create the YAML, not to create the object. It should be consistent. 

> . Create a file, such as `sriov-node-network-policy.yaml`, with content like the following example:

+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: sriovnetwork.openshift.io/v1
kind: SriovNetworkNodePolicy
metadata:
 name: sriovnic
 namespace: openshift-sriov-network-operator
spec:
 deviceType: netdevice <1>
 isRdma: true <2>
 needVhostNet: true <3>
 nicSelector:
   vendor: "15b3" <4>
   deviceID: "101b" <5>
   rootDevices: ["00:05.0"]
 numVfs: 10
 priority: 99
 resourceName: sriovnic
 nodeSelector:
    feature.node.kubernetes.io/network-sriov.capable: "true"
----
<1> This indicates that the profile is tailored specifically for Mellanox Network Interface Controllers (NICs).
<2> Setting `isRdma` to `true` is only required for a Mellanox NIC.
<3> This mounts the `/dev/net/tun` and `/dev/vhost-net` devices into the container so the application can create a tap device and connect the tap device to the DPDK workload.
<4> The vendor hexadecimal code of the SR-IOV network device. The value 15b3 is associated with a Mellanox NIC.
<5> The device hexadecimal code of the SR-IOV network device.

. Create the `SriovNetworkNodePolicy` object by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create -f sriov-node-network-policy.yaml
----

> . Create the following `SriovNetwork` object, and then save the YAML in the `sriov-network-attachment.yaml` file:

Reviewer: In the other steps, this step is to create the YAML, not to create the object. It should be consistent.

+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: sriovnetwork.openshift.io/v1
kind: SriovNetwork
metadata:
 name: sriov-network
 namespace: openshift-sriov-network-operator
spec:
 networkNamespace: test-namespace
 resourceName: sriovnic
 spoofChk: "off"
 trust: "on"
----
+
[NOTE]
=====
See the "Configuring SR-IOV additional network" section for a detailed explanation on each option in `SriovNetwork`.
=====
+
An optional library, `app-netutil`, provides several API methods for gathering network information about a container's parent pod.

. Create the `SriovNetwork` object by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create -f sriov-network-attachment.yaml

> ----

Reviewer: Why is this one `oc create` and the others are `oc apply`? Is there a difference?

Author: My understanding is there is little difference, but I am going to leave as is because this was the procedure verified.

Reviewer 2: apply will also work. Let's change it to be consistent

> . Create a YAML file, `tap-example.yaml` defining a network attachment definition, such as in the following example:

Reviewer: Create a file, such as `tap-example.yaml`, that defines a network attachment definition, with content like the following example:

+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: "k8s.cni.cncf.io/v1"
kind: NetworkAttachmentDefinition
metadata:
 name: tap-one
 namespace: test-namespace <1>
spec:
 config: '{
   "cniVersion": "0.4.0",
   "name": "tap",
   "plugins": [
     {
        "type": "tap",
        "multiQueue": true,
        "selinuxcontext": "system_u:system_r:container_t:s0"
     },
     {
       "type":"tuning",
       "capabilities":{
         "mac":true
       }
     }
   ]
 }'
----
<1> Specify the same `target_namespace` where the `SriovNetwork` object is created.

> . Apply the `yaml` by running the following command:

Reviewer: . Create the `NetworkAttachmentDefinition` object by running the following command:

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f tap-example.yaml
----

> . Create the following `Pod` spec, and then save the YAML in the `dpdk-pod-rootless.yaml` file:

Reviewer: Create a file, such as dpdk-pod-rootless.yaml, with content like the following example:

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * networking/hardware_networks/using-dpdk-and-rdma.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="nw-running-dpdk-rootless-tap_{context}"]

> = Running the DPDK workload with kernel access

Reviewer 3: May be we can also change it to "the rootless dpdk workload"  ?

It is desirable to allow certain types of traffic for example log messages to take a exception path from your DPDK application. To support this you need access to the kernel networking and the tap device plugin provides this capability. This allows the DPDK application to run as a non privileged user (rootless).

.DPDK and TAP example configuration
image::rootless_dpdk_example.png[DPDK and TAP plugin]

.Prerequisites

* Install the OpenShift CLI (`oc`).
* Install the SR-IOV Network Operator.
* Log in as a user with `cluster-admin` privileges.

> * Run `setsebools container_use_devices=true` as root on all nodes.

Reviewer 3: Can we provide an official way to activate this selinux boolean? May be MachineConfig resource example ?

Author: I added link in additional resources section maybe I need to reference here too

Author: This is the MachineConfig I applied 
```
apiVersion: machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1
kind: MachineConfig
metadata:
  labels:
    machineconfiguration.openshift.io/role: worker
  name: 99-worker-setsebool
spec:
  config:
    ignition:
      version: 3.2.0
    systemd:
      units:
      - contents: |
          [Unit]
          Description=Set SELinux booleans
          Before=kubelet.service

          [Service]
          Type=oneshot
          ExecStart=/usr/sbin/setsebool container_use_devices true

          [Install]
          WantedBy=multi-user.target graphical.target
        enabled: true
        name: setsebool.service
```

However, I cannot see it applied when I log into the node though I think MachineConfig is correct 

```
Temporary namespace openshift-debug-w9hs6 is created for debugging node...
Starting pod/mysno-snodemolab-debug ...
To use host binaries, run `chroot /host`
Pod IP: 192.168.122.72
If you don't see a command prompt, try pressing enter.
sh-4.4# chroot /host
sh-5.1# getsebool container_use_devices
container_use_devices --> off
```

Reviewer 2: This is a prerequisite which is always needed for the tap cni. Don't include it in the procedure. I completely agree with @kononovn. There should be an example, please create a new PR in the tap cni section with this. The official crd is:

apiVersion: machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1
kind: MachineConfig
metadata:
  labels:
    machineconfiguration.openshift.io/role: worker
  name: 99-worker-setsebool
spec:
  config:
    ignition:
      version: 3.2.0
    systemd:
      units:
        - contents: |
            [Unit]
            Description=Set SELinux boolean for tap cni plugin
            Before=kubelet.service
            
            [Service]
            Type=oneshot
            ExecStart=/sbin/setsebool container_use_devices=on
            RemainAfterExit=true
            
            [Install]
            WantedBy=multi-user.target graphical.target
          enabled: true
          name: setsebool.service

Please add this in the documentation. Note that it takes a lot of time (15 minutes or so) to be applied. you can check it with oc get machineconfigpools.

.Procedure

. Create the following `SriovNetworkNodePolicy` object, and then save the YAML in the `intel-dpdk-node-policy.yaml` file.
+
[source,yaml]
----

> apiVersion: sriovnetwork.openshift.io/v1

Reviewer 3: I think you need  needVhostNet: true flag installed. Better to sync with RnD about that.

Reviewer 2: yes, it is needed as explained above.

Reviewer 2: you can also ask a yaml used by @kononovn

+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: sriovnetwork.openshift.io/v1
kind: SriovNetwork
metadata:
  name: intel-dpdk-network
  namespace: openshift-sriov-network-operator
spec:
  networkNamespace: <target_namespace>
  ipam: |-
# ... <1>
  vlan: <vlan>
  resourceName: intelnics
----
<1> Specify a configuration object for the IPAM CNI plugin as a YAML block scalar. The plugin manages IP address assignment for the attachment definition.
+
[NOTE]
=====
See the "Configuring SR-IOV additional network" section for a detailed explanation on each option in `SriovNetwork`.
=====
+
An optional library, app-netutil, provides several API methods for gathering network information about a container's parent pod.

. Create the `SriovNetwork` object by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create -f intel-dpdk-network.yaml
----

. Create a YAML file `tap-example.yaml` defining a network attachment definition, such as in the following example:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: "k8s.cni.cncf.io/v1"
kind: NetworkAttachmentDefinition
metadata:
 name: tap-one
 namespace: <target_namespace> <1>
spec:
 config: '{
   "cniVersion": "0.4.0",
   "name": "tap",
   "plugins": [
     {

>         "type": "tap",

Reviewer 3: I think we need to add more infor about tap plugin. May be you can add link to the tap documentation ?

Author: Once I get this submitted and the other related ones I was going to revisit and create a separate PR to link various sections that have related information

        "multiQueue": true,
        "selinuxcontext": "system_u:system_r:container_t:s0",
        "owner": 1001,
        "group": 1001
     },
     {
       "type":"tuning",
       "capabilities":{
         "mac":true
       }
     }
   ]
 }'
----
<1> Specify the same `target_namespace` where the `SriovNetwork` object `intel-dpdk-network` is created.

. Apply the `yaml` by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f tap-example.yaml
----
+

> .Example output

Reviewer 3: Why does tap resource have "Example output" and the rest of the resources above (sriovPolicy, sriovNetwork) don't?

[source,terminal]
----
networkattachmentdefinition.k8s.cni.cncf.io/tap created
----

. Create the following `Pod` spec, and then save the YAML in the `intel-dpdk-pod-rootless.yaml` file.
+
[source,yaml]
----

> apiVersion: v1

Reviewer 3: In order to run dpdk pod we need to have PerformanceProfile installed. Can we add it as a step ?

Author: There are a number of steps involved so I called out the appropriate section and I will add link in Additional resources section.

kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: dpdk-app
  namespace: <target_namespace> <1>

>   annotations:

Reviewer 3: If you need to connect pod to the sriov network and tap you have to use following annotation:

```
    k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks: '[
      {"name": "sriov-network", "namespace": "test-namespace"},
      {"name": "tap-one", "interface": "ext0", "namespace": "test-namespace"}]'

```

    k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks: intel-dpdk-network
spec:
  containers:
  - name: testpmd
    image: <DPDK_image> <2>

>     securityContext:

Reviewer 3: You need to configure also podSecurityContext. Please take a look on working pod manifest example. This will work for mlx only:

```
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: dpdk-app
  namespace: test-namespace
  annotations:
    k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks: '[
      {"name": "sriov-network", "namespace": "test-namespace"},
      {"name": "tap-one", "interface": "ext0", "namespace": "test-namespace"}]'
spec:
  nodeSelector:
    kubernetes.io/hostname: "worker-1"
  securityContext:
    fsGroup: 801
    runAsGroup: 1001
    seccompProfile:
      type: RuntimeDefault
  containers:
  - name: testpmd
    image: quay.io/ocp-edge-qe/eco-gotests-rootless-dpdk:v4.14.1
    securityContext:
      capabilities:
        drop: ["ALL"]
        add:
          - IPC_LOCK
          - SYS_RESOURCE
          - NET_RAW #for mlx only
          - NET_ADMIN
      runAsUser: 1001 
      privileged: false 
      allowPrivilegeEscalation: true 
      runAsNonRoot: true 
    volumeMounts:
    - mountPath: /dev/hugepages 
      name: hugepage
    resources:
      limits:
        openshift.io/mlxnics: "1" 
        memory: "1Gi"
        cpu: "4" 
        hugepages-1Gi: "4Gi" 
      requests:
        openshift.io/mlxnics: "1"
        memory: "1Gi"
        cpu: "4"
        hugepages-1Gi: "4Gi"
    command: ["sleep", "infinity"]
  volumes:
  - name: hugepage
    emptyDir:
      medium: HugePages
```

<14> Specify hugepage size `hugepages-1Gi` or `hugepages-2Mi` and the quantity of hugepages that will be allocated to the DPDK pod. Configure `2Mi` and `1Gi` hugepages separately. Configuring `1Gi` hugepage requires adding kernel arguments to Nodes. For example, adding kernel arguments `default_hugepagesz=1GB`, `hugepagesz=1G` and `hugepages=16` will result in `16*1Gi` hugepages be allocated during system boot.
+
[NOTE]
====
Modify the configuration of your DPDK application to run with user ID `1001` and group ID `1001`. This can be achieved through different approaches depending on the specific requirements and configuration options of your DPDK application.
====
+
--
+
. Create the DPDK pod by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create -f intel-dpdk-pod-rootless.yaml
----

. Verify that the pod is created by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get pod
----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
NAME       READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE

> test-pod   1/1     Running   0          4m36s

Reviewer 3: The name of the pod in manifest above is **dpdk-app**

----

. Log in to the pod by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc rsh test-pod

Reviewer 3: Looks like useless cmd. Would you like to run specific cmd on rootless dpdk pod ?

----

. Verify the tap plugin is created:
+
[source,terminal]
----
sh-4.4#
----
+
.Expected output
[source,terminal]

> ----

Reviewer 3: This is empty output.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * networking/hardware_networks/using-dpdk-and-rdma.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="nw-running-dpdk-rootless-tap_{context}"]
= Using the TAP CNI to run a rootless DPDK workload with kernel access

> DPDK applications can use `virtio-user` as an exception path to inject certain types of packets for example log messages into the kernel for processing. For more information about this feature see link:https://doc.dpdk.org/guides/howto/virtio_user_as_exception_path.html[Virtio_user as Exception Path].

Reviewer 2: with this reference, I think that we definitely don't need the diagram since there is one there.

.DPDK and TAP example configuration
image::rootless_dpdk_example.png[DPDK and TAP plugin]

.Prerequisites

* Install the OpenShift CLI (`oc`).
* Install the SR-IOV Network Operator.
* Log in as a user with `cluster-admin` privileges.
* Ensure `setsebools container_use_devices=on` as root on all nodes.
+
[NOTE]
====
Use the Machine Config Operator to set this SELinux boolean.
====

.Procedure

. Create a dedicated container namespace where you want to deploy your pod by using the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc new-project test-namespace
----

. Create the following `SriovNetworkNodePolicy` object, and then save the YAML in the `sriov-node-network-policy.yaml` file:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: sriovnetwork.openshift.io/v1
kind: SriovNetworkNodePolicy
metadata:
 name: sriovnic
 namespace: openshift-sriov-network-operator
spec:
 deviceType: netdevice <1>
 isRdma: true
 needVhostNet: true
 nicSelector:
   vendor: "15b3" <2>
   deviceID: "101b" <3>
   rootDevices: ["00:05.0"]
 numVfs: 10
 priority: 99
 resourceName: sriovnic
 nodeSelector:
    feature.node.kubernetes.io/network-sriov.capable: "true"
----

> <1> This indicates that the profile is tailored specifically for Mellanox Network Interface Controllers (NICs).

Reviewer 3: May be we can mention that we need to use deviceType: vfio-pci for Intel card

<2> The vendor hexadecimal code of the SR-IOV network device. The value 15b3 is associated with a Mellanox NIC.
<3> The device hexadecimal code of the SR-IOV network device.

. Create the `SriovNetworkNodePolicy` object by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create -f sriov-node-network-policy.yaml
----
+
[NOTE]
=====
See the `Configuring SR-IOV network devices` section for a detailed explanation on each option in `SriovNetworkNodePolicy`.

When applying the configuration specified in a `SriovNetworkNodePolicy` object, the SR-IOV Operator may drain the nodes, and in some cases, reboot nodes.
It may take several minutes for a configuration change to apply.
Ensure that there are enough available nodes in your cluster to handle the evicted workload beforehand.

> After the configuration update is applied, all the pods in `openshift-sriov-network-operator` namespace will change to a `Running` status.

Reviewer 3: May be we need to add that mcp gets updated and we need to wait until all nodes are moved to **READYMACHINECOUNT** and UPDATED==true

NAME        CONFIG                                                UPDATED   UPDATING   DEGRADED   MACHINECOUNT   READYMACHINECOUNT   UPDATEDMACHINECOUNT   DEGRADEDMACHINECOUNT   AGE
master      rendered-master-e5e0c8e8be9194e7c5a882e047379cfa      True      False      False      3              3                   3                     0                      7d6h
worker   rendered-workercnf-3b87971b3d368847bff7ff11930006ea   True     False      False      3              3                   3                     0                      7d4h

=====
+
An optional library, app-netutil, provides several API methods for gathering network information about a container's parent pod.

. Create the `SriovNetwork` object by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create -f sriov-network-attachment.yaml
----

. Create a YAML file `tap-example.yaml` defining a network attachment definition, such as in the following example:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: "k8s.cni.cncf.io/v1"
kind: NetworkAttachmentDefinition
metadata:
 name: tap-one
 namespace: test-namespace <1>
spec:
 config: '{
   "cniVersion": "0.4.0",
   "name": "tap",
   "plugins": [
     {
        "type": "tap",
        "multiQueue": true,
        "selinuxcontext": "system_u:system_r:container_t:s0",
        "owner": 1001,
        "group": 1001
     },
     {
       "type":"tuning",
       "capabilities":{
         "mac":true
       }
     }
   ]
 }'
----
<1> Specify the same `target_namespace` where the `SriovNetwork` object is created.

. Apply the `yaml` by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f tap-example.yaml
----

> . Create a performance profile by following the guidance in "Creating a performance profile".

Reviewer 3: May be we can add link to **Creating a performance profile** ?

Author: I can only add this in Additional resources can't add in main docs text restriction of build process

. Create the following `Pod` spec, and then save the YAML in the `dpdk-pod-rootless.yaml` file.
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: dpdk-app
  namespace: test-namespace <1>
  annotations:
    k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks: '[
      {"name": "sriov-network", "namespace": "test-namespace"},
      {"name": "tap-one", "interface": "ext0", "namespace": "test-namespace"}]'
spec:
  nodeSelector:
    kubernetes.io/hostname: "worker-1"
  securityContext:
    seccompProfile:
      type: RuntimeDefault
  containers:
  - name: testpmd
    image: <DPDK_image> <2>
    securityContext:
      capabilities:
        drop: ["ALL"] <3>
        add: <4>
          - IPC_LOCK
          - SYS_RESOURCE
          - NET_RAW #for mlx only <5>
          - NET_ADMIN
      fsGroup: 801 <6>
      runAsUser: 1001 <7>
      runAsGroup: 1001 <8>
      privileged: false <9>
      allowPrivilegeEscalation: true <10>
      runAsNonRoot: true <11>
    volumeMounts:
    - mountPath: /dev/hugepages <12>
      name: hugepage
    resources:
      limits:

>         openshift.io/mlxnics: "1" <13>

Reviewer 3: Please update to **openshift.io/sriovnic** according to policy that we added on previous step.

        memory: "1Gi"
        cpu: "4" <14>
        hugepages-1Gi: "4Gi" <15>
      requests:

>         openshift.io/mlxnics: "1"

Reviewer 3: Please update to **openshift.io/sriovnic** according to policy that we added on previous step.

        memory: "1Gi"
        cpu: "4"
        hugepages-1Gi: "4Gi"
    command: ["sleep", "infinity"]
  runtimeClassName: performance-cnf-performanceprofile <16>
  volumes:
  - name: hugepage
    emptyDir:
      medium: HugePages

> ----

Reviewer 3: I failed to run dpdk application based on present pod yaml. I think we need to debug it with @mlguerrero12 . We'll share working pod yaml with you.

Author: Thank you @kononovn I'd appreciate that.

<14> Specify the number of CPUs. The DPDK pod usually requires exclusive CPUs to be allocated from the kubelet. This is achieved by setting CPU Manager policy to `static` and creating a pod with `Guaranteed` QoS.
<15> Specify hugepage size `hugepages-1Gi` or `hugepages-2Mi` and the quantity of hugepages that will be allocated to the DPDK pod. Configure `2Mi` and `1Gi` hugepages separately. Configuring `1Gi` hugepage requires adding kernel arguments to Nodes. For example, adding kernel arguments `default_hugepagesz=1GB`, `hugepagesz=1G` and `hugepages=16` will result in `16*1Gi` hugepages be allocated during system boot.
+
[NOTE]
====
Modify the configuration of your DPDK application to run with user ID `1001` and group ID `1001`. This can be achieved through different approaches depending on the specific requirements and configuration options of your DPDK application.
====
+
<16> If your performance profile is not named `cnf-performance profile`, replace that string with the correct performance profile name.
--
+
. Create the DPDK pod by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc create -f dpdk-pod-rootless.yaml

Reviewer 3: I can not create pod without additional namespace config. When I applied this yaml I got following error:
`Error from server (Forbidden): error when creating "pod-dpdk-pod-rootless.yaml": pods "dpdk-app" is forbidden: violates PodSecurity "restricted:v1.24": allowPrivilegeEscalation != false (container "testpmd" must set securityContext.allowPrivilegeEscalation=false), unrestricted capabilities (container "testpmd" must not include "IPC_LOCK", "NET_ADMIN", "NET_RAW", "SYS_RESOURCE" in securityContext.capabilities.add)`
I had to add specific labels for test-namespace
oc label namespace test-namespace pod-security.kubernetes.io/enforce=privileged --overwrite
oc label namespace test-namespace pod-security.kubernetes.io/audit=privileged
oc label namespace test-namespace pod-security.kubernetes.io/warn=privileged --overwrite
oc label namespace test-namespace security.openshift.io/scc.podSecurityLabelSync=false --overwrite

----

. Verify that the pod is created by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc get pod

Reviewer 3: I think it's always to good to be as much specific as possible. Let update this cmd to:

**oc get pod -n test-namespace**

WDYT?

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="nw-running-dpdk-rootless-tap_{context}"]
= Using the TAP CNI to run a rootless DPDK workload with kernel access

DPDK applications can use `virtio-user` as an exception path to inject certain types of packets, such as log messages, into the kernel for processing. For more information about this feature, see link:https://doc.dpdk.org/guides/howto/virtio_user_as_exception_path.html[Virtio_user as Exception Path].

In OpenShift Container Platform version 4.14 and later, you can use non-privileged pods to run DPDK applications alongside the tap CNI plugin. To enable this functionality, you need to mount the `vhost-net` device by setting the `needVhostNet` parameter to `true` within the `SriovNetworkNodePolicy` object.

.DPDK and TAP example configuration
image::rootless_dpdk_example.png[DPDK and TAP plugin]

.Prerequisites

* You have installed the OpenShift CLI (`oc`).
* You have installed the SR-IOV Network Operator.
* You are logged in as a user with `cluster-admin` privileges.
* Ensure that `setsebools container_use_devices=on` is set as root on all nodes.
+
[NOTE]
====
Use the Machine Config Operator to set this SELinux boolean.
====

.Procedure

> . Create a namespace `test-namespace` with the labels as in the following example YAML file, `test-namespace.yaml:

Reviewer 2: do we do this in other examples of this section?

Reviewer 2: I would say it's better to remove it to be consistent with other examples in this page, but this particular case is different. We need to explain why a rootless application needs to have the pod security privileged. 

https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-standards/

You can say that it is needed because of the used capabilities and allowPrivilegeEscalation equal to true.

+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: v1
kind: Namespace
metadata:
  name: test-namespace
  labels:
    pod-security.kubernetes.io/enforce: privileged
    pod-security.kubernetes.io/audit: privileged
    pod-security.kubernetes.io/warn: privileged
    security.openshift.io/scc.podSecurityLabelSync: "false"
----

. Apply the yaml by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f test-namespace.yaml
----

. Create the following `SriovNetworkNodePolicy` object, and then save the YAML in the `sriov-node-network-policy.yaml` file:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: sriovnetwork.openshift.io/v1
kind: SriovNetworkNodePolicy
metadata:
 name: sriovnic
 namespace: openshift-sriov-network-operator
spec:
 deviceType: netdevice <1>
 isRdma: true <2>

>  needVhostNet: true

Reviewer 2: please add a bullet for needVhostNet. This is important for this example.

 nicSelector:
   vendor: "15b3" <3>
   deviceID: "101b" <4>
   rootDevices: ["00:05.0"]
 numVfs: 10
 priority: 99
 resourceName: sriovnic
 nodeSelector:
    feature.node.kubernetes.io/network-sriov.capable: "true"
----
<1> This indicates that the profile is tailored specifically for Mellanox Network Interface Controllers (NICs).
<2> Setting `isRdma` to `true` is only required for a Mellanox NIC.
<3> The vendor hexadecimal code of the SR-IOV network device. The value 15b3 is associated with a Mellanox NIC.
<4> The device hexadecimal code of the SR-IOV network device.

. Create the `SriovNetworkNodePolicy` object by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create -f sriov-node-network-policy.yaml
----
+

> After the configuration update is applied, all the pods in `openshift-sriov-network-operator` namespace change to a `Running` status.

Reviewer 2: where did you get this?

. Verify the change is applied by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc get machineconfigpools

Reviewer 2: do we do this in other examples? if not, let's remove it

+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: sriovnetwork.openshift.io/v1
kind: SriovNetwork
metadata:
 name: sriov-network
 namespace: openshift-sriov-network-operator
spec:
 networkNamespace: test-namespace
 resourceName: sriovnic
 spoofChk: "off"
 trust: "on"
----
+
[NOTE]
=====
See the "Configuring SR-IOV additional network" section for a detailed explanation on each option in `SriovNetwork`.
=====
+
An optional library, `app-netutil`, provides several API methods for gathering network information about a container's parent pod.

. Create the `SriovNetwork` object by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create -f sriov-network-attachment.yaml
----

. Create a YAML file, `tap-example.yaml` defining a network attachment definition, such as in the following example:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: "k8s.cni.cncf.io/v1"
kind: NetworkAttachmentDefinition
metadata:
 name: tap-one
 namespace: test-namespace <1>
spec:
 config: '{
   "cniVersion": "0.4.0",
   "name": "tap",
   "plugins": [
     {
        "type": "tap",
        "multiQueue": true,
        "selinuxcontext": "system_u:system_r:container_t:s0",

>         "owner": 1001,

Reviewer 2: no need to add owner and group. Let's delete them

        "group": 1001
     },
     {
       "type":"tuning",
       "capabilities":{
         "mac":true
       }
     }
   ]
 }'
----
<1> Specify the same `target_namespace` where the `SriovNetwork` object is created.

. Apply the `yaml` by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f tap-example.yaml
----

> . Create a performance profile by following the procedure in "Creating a performance profile" section.

Reviewer 2: do we mention this in other sections?

    volumeMounts:
    - mountPath: /mnt/huge <12>
      name: hugepages
    resources:
      limits:
        openshift.io/sriovnic: "1" <13>
        memory: "1Gi"
        cpu: "4" <14>
        hugepages-1Gi: "4Gi" <15>
      requests:
        openshift.io/sriovnic: "1"
        memory: "1Gi"
        cpu: "4"
        hugepages-1Gi: "4Gi"
    command: ["sleep", "infinity"]
  runtimeClassName: performance-cnf-performanceprofile <16>
  volumes:
  - name: hugepages
    emptyDir:
      medium: HugePages
----
+
--
<1> Specify the same `target_namespace` where the `SriovNetwork` object is created. If you want to create the pod in a different namespace, change `target_namespace` in both the `Pod` spec and the `SriovNetwork` object.
<2> Sets the group ownership of volume-mounted directories and files created in those volumes.
<3> Controls which primary group ID the containers are run with.
<4> Specify the DPDK image which includes your application and the DPDK library used by application.
<5> Dropping all capabilities (`ALL`) from the container's securityContext means that the container will not have any special privileges beyond what is necessary for normal operation.

> <6> Specify additional capabilities required by the application inside the container for hugepage allocation, system resource allocation, and network interface access the Virtual Function I/O (VFIO) device.

Author: Made minor adjustment inline with how other sections describe this parameter

> <6> Specify additional capabilities required by the application inside the container for hugepage allocation, system resource allocation, and network interface access.

Reviewer 2: We need to add a note here saying something like "Note that these capabilities must also be set in the binary file"

For example, adding these capabilities to dpdk-testpmd

RUN setcap cap_ipc_lock,cap_net_raw+ep /usr/local/bin/dpdk-testpmd

This is important for users to know.

<7> Mellanox network interface controller (NIC) requires the `NET_RAW` capability.

> <8> Controls which user ID the container is run with.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<8> Controls which user ID the container is operated with.
```

> <9> This setting indicates that the container(s) within the pod should not be granted privileged access to the host system.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<9> This setting indicates that one or more containers within the pod should not be granted privileged access to the host system.
```

> <10>  This setting allows a container to escalate its privileges beyond the initial non-root privileges it may have been assigned.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<10>  This setting allows a container to escalate its privileges beyond the initial non-root privileges it might have been assigned.
```

> <11> This setting ensures that the container runs with a non-root user. This helps enforce the principle of least privilege, limiting the potential impact of a container compromise and reducing the attack surface.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<11> This setting ensures that the container runs with a non-root user. This helps enforce the principle of least privilege, limiting the potential impact of compromising the container and reducing the attack surface.
```

> <12> Mount a hugepage volume to the DPDK pod under `/mnt/huge`. The hugepage volume is backed by the emptyDir volume type with the medium being `Hugepages`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<12> Mount a hugepage volume to the DPDK pod under `/mnt/huge`. The hugepage volume is backed by the emptyDir volume type, where the medium is `Hugepages`.
```

Author: Going to leave as is because that is consistent with the description in other sections.

> <13> Optional: Specify the number of DPDK devices allocated to DPDK pod. This resource request and limit, if not explicitly specified, will be automatically added by the SR-IOV network resource injector. The SR-IOV network resource injector is an admission controller component managed by the SR-IOV Operator. It is enabled by default and can be disabled by setting `enableInjector` option to `false` in the default `SriovOperatorConfig` CR.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<13> Optional: specify the number of DPDK devices assigned to the DPDK pod. This resource request and limit are automatically added by the SR-IOV network resource injector unless explicitly specified. The SR-IOV network resource injector is an admission control component managed by the SR-IOV operator. It is enabled by default and can be disabled by setting the `enableInjector` option to `false` in the default `SriovOperatorConfig`CR.
```

> <14> Specify the number of CPUs. The DPDK pod usually requires exclusive CPUs to be allocated from the kubelet. This is achieved by setting CPU Manager policy to `static` and creating a pod with `Guaranteed` QoS.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<14> Specify the number of CPUs. The DPDK pod normally requires exclusive CPUs allocated by the kubelet. This is achieved by setting the CPU Manager policy to `static` and creating a pod with `Guaranteed` QoS.
```

Author: Going to leave as is to be consistent with other sections.

> <15> Specify hugepage size `hugepages-1Gi` or `hugepages-2Mi` and the quantity of hugepages that will be allocated to the DPDK pod. Configure `2Mi` and `1Gi` hugepages separately. Configuring `1Gi` hugepage requires adding kernel arguments to Nodes. For example, adding kernel arguments `default_hugepagesz=1GB`, `hugepagesz=1G` and `hugepages=16` will result in `16*1Gi` hugepages be allocated during system boot.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<15> Specify the size of the hugepage `hugepages-1Gi` or `hugepages-2Mi` and the number of hugepages to allocate to the DPDK pod. Configure `2Mi` and `1Gi` hugepages separately. Configuring the `1Gi` hugepage requires adding kernel arguments to nodes. For example, if you add the kernel arguments `default_hugepagesz=1GB`, `hugepages=1G`, and hugepages=16, `16*1Gi` hugepages are assigned at boot time.

Author: Going to leave as is to be consistent with other sections where same field is described.

+
[NOTE]
====
Modify the configuration of your DPDK application to run with user ID `1001` and group ID `1001`. Depending on the specific requirements and configuration options of your DPDK application, you can accomplish this in several ways.
====
+
<16> If your performance profile is not named `cnf-performance profile`, replace that string with the correct performance profile name.
--
+
. Create the DPDK pod by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create -f dpdk-pod-rootless.yaml
----

. Get detailed information about the `dpdk-app` within the `test-namespace` by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]

> ----

Reviewer 2: what I'm missing here is an example of how to run dpdk-testpmd. So, we could say that our dpdk-base image has already the required capabilities for dpdk-testpmd and that we could run it with the following command.

@kononovn, please share the command you use in your tests. Just to receive traffic from the vf and forward it to the tap device.

Author: I am not entirely following the context here, do I need to make some reference to `dpdk-testpmd` with respect to this example.

----
+
[NOTE]
=====
See the `Configuring SR-IOV network devices` section for a detailed explanation on each option in `SriovNetworkNodePolicy`.

When applying the configuration specified in a `SriovNetworkNodePolicy` object, the SR-IOV Operator may drain the nodes, and in some cases, reboot nodes.
It may take several minutes for a configuration change to apply.
Ensure that there are enough available nodes in your cluster to handle the evicted workload beforehand.

After the configuration update is applied, all the pods in `openshift-sriov-network-operator` namespace will change to a `Running` status.

The MCP gets updated and you need to wait until all nodes are listed under `READYMACHINECOUNT` and `UPDATED` is equal to `TRUE`.

[source,terminal,options="nowrap",role="white-space-pre"]
----
NAME        CONFIG                                                UPDATED   UPDATING   DEGRADED   MACHINECOUNT   READYMACHINECOUNT   UPDATEDMACHINECOUNT   DEGRADEDMACHINECOUNT   AGE
master      rendered-master-e5e0c8e8be9194e7c5a882e047379cfa      True      False      False      3              3                   3                     0                      7d2h

> worker      rendered-workercnf-d6c9ca107fba6cd76cdcbfcedcafa0f2   True      False      False      3              3                   3                     0                      7d

Reviewer 3: Minor: Remove cnf from wroker**cnf**

     },
     {
       "type":"tuning",
       "capabilities":{
         "mac":true
       }
     }
   ]
 }'
----
<1> Specify the same `target_namespace` where the `SriovNetwork` object is created.

. Apply the `yaml` by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f tap-example.yaml
----

. Create a performance profile by following the guidance in "Creating a performance profile".

. Create the following `Pod` spec, and then save the YAML in the `dpdk-pod-rootless.yaml` file.
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: dpdk-app
  namespace: test-namespace <1>
  annotations:
    k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks: '[
      {"name": "sriov-network", "namespace": "test-namespace"},
      {"name": "tap-one", "interface": "ext0", "namespace": "test-namespace"}]'
spec:
  nodeSelector:
    kubernetes.io/hostname: "worker-0"
  securityContext:
      fsGroup: 1001 <2>
      runAsGroup: 1001 <3>
      seccompProfile:
        type: RuntimeDefault
  containers:
  - name: testpmd
    image: <DPDK_image> <4>
    securityContext:
      capabilities:
        drop: ["ALL"] <5>
        add: <6>
          - IPC_LOCK
          - NET_RAW #for mlx only <7>

>           - NET_ADMIN

Reviewer 2: delete NET_ADMIN, @kononovn please confirm that it works without it. This should only be for manipulating routes with ip

Author: @kononovn Are you able to confirm this, I know you set to LGTM so may have to go with what is now there without confirmation.

Reviewer 2: NET_ADMIN shouldn't be there. It goes against the purpose of rootless dpdk.

Author: removed

      runAsUser: 1001 <8>
      privileged: false <9>
      allowPrivilegeEscalation: true <10>
      runAsNonRoot: true <11>
    volumeMounts:
    - mountPath: /mnt/huge <12>
      name: hugepages
    resources:
      limits:
        openshift.io/sriovnic: "1" <13>
        memory: "1Gi"
        cpu: "4" <14>
        hugepages-1Gi: "4Gi" <15>
      requests:
        openshift.io/sriovnic: "1"
        memory: "1Gi"
        cpu: "4"
        hugepages-1Gi: "4Gi"
    command: ["sleep", "infinity"]
  runtimeClassName: performance-cnf-performanceprofile <16>
  volumes:
  - name: hugepages
    emptyDir:
      medium: HugePages
----
+
--

> <1> Specify the same `target_namespace` where the `SriovNetwork` object `intel-dpdk-network` is created. If you want to create the pod in a different namespace, change `target_namespace` in both the `Pod` spec and the `SriovNetwork` object.

Author: My mistake a copy maybe from another generic section.

<14> Specify the number of CPUs. The DPDK pod usually requires exclusive CPUs to be allocated from the kubelet. This is achieved by setting CPU Manager policy to `static` and creating a pod with `Guaranteed` QoS.
<15> Specify hugepage size `hugepages-1Gi` or `hugepages-2Mi` and the quantity of hugepages that will be allocated to the DPDK pod. Configure `2Mi` and `1Gi` hugepages separately. Configuring `1Gi` hugepage requires adding kernel arguments to Nodes. For example, adding kernel arguments `default_hugepagesz=1GB`, `hugepagesz=1G` and `hugepages=16` will result in `16*1Gi` hugepages be allocated during system boot.
+
[NOTE]
====
Modify the configuration of your DPDK application to run with user ID `1001` and group ID `1001`. This can be achieved through different approaches depending on the specific requirements and configuration options of your DPDK application.
====
+
<16> If your performance profile is not named `cnf-performance profile`, replace that string with the correct performance profile name.
--
+
. Create the DPDK pod by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create -f dpdk-pod-rootless.yaml
----

> . Verify that the pod is created by running the following command:

Author: We do have verification steps in other parts of documentation, I think it is a good check to have and confirms to user where they are and what they have done

> . Verify that the pod is created by running the following command:

Reviewer 2: where? in the sriov, dpdk pages? If not, then, don't add it. We need to have consistency.

  containers:
  - name: testpmd
    image: <DPDK_image> <4>
    securityContext:
      capabilities:
        drop: ["ALL"] <5>
        add: <6>
          - IPC_LOCK
          - NET_RAW #for mlx only <7>
          - NET_ADMIN
      runAsUser: 1001 <8>
      privileged: false <9>
      allowPrivilegeEscalation: true <10>
      runAsNonRoot: true <11>
    volumeMounts:
    - mountPath: /mnt/huge <12>
      name: hugepages
    resources:
      limits:
        openshift.io/sriovnic: "1" <13>
        memory: "1Gi"
        cpu: "4" <14>
        hugepages-1Gi: "4Gi" <15>
      requests:
        openshift.io/sriovnic: "1"
        memory: "1Gi"
        cpu: "4"
        hugepages-1Gi: "4Gi"
    command: ["sleep", "infinity"]
  runtimeClassName: performance-cnf-performanceprofile <16>
  volumes:
  - name: hugepages
    emptyDir:
      medium: HugePages
----
+
--
<1> Specify the same `target_namespace` where the `SriovNetwork` object is created. If you want to create the pod in a different namespace, change `target_namespace` in both the `Pod` spec and the `SriovNetwork` object.
<2> Sets the group ownership of volume-mounted directories and files created in those volumes.

> <3> Controls which primary group ID the containers are run with.

Author: In Linux I think the standard way to address this is to use run. It is common to say that processes are run with a particular group.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * networking/hardware_networks/using-dpdk-and-rdma.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="nw-running-dpdk-rootless-tap_{context}"]
= Using the TAP CNI to run a rootless DPDK workload with kernel access

> In OpenShift Container Platform 4.14 and greater, DPDK pods can run as a normal user by using the TAP plugin to provide a bridged network connection between the container and the host operating system.

Reviewer 2: This is not correct. It's a bit confusing. First, I would start giving a short description of the solution used here. It could be something like "DPDK applications can use virtio-user as exception path to inject some type of packets (i.e. log messages) into the kernel for processing there". We could add a reference to https://doc.dpdk.org/guides/howto/virtio_user_as_exception_path.html. Then, we can mention something like "This solution requires the vhost-net device to be mounted in the pod which can be done by enabling the needVhostNet parameter of the SriovNetworkNodePolicy object". Then, for a rootless pod, we can write something like "In OpenShift Container Platform 4.14 and greater, non-priviledged pods can run this type of DPDK application in conjuntion with the tap CNI plugin." This is what it is new.

kind: MachineConfig
metadata:
  labels:
    machineconfiguration.openshift.io/role: worker
  name: 99-worker-setsebool
spec:
  config:
    ignition:
      version: 3.2.0
    systemd:
      units:
      - contents: |
          [Unit]
          Description=Set SELinux booleans
          Before=kubelet.service

          [Service]
          Type=oneshot
          ExecStart=/usr/sbin/setsebool container_use_devices true

          [Install]
          WantedBy=multi-user.target graphical.target
        enabled: true
        name: setsebool.service
----

.. Apply the configuration:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f setsebool-container-use-devices.yaml
----

. Create a dedicated container namespace where you want to deploy your pod by using the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc new-project test-namespace
----

. Create the following `SriovNetworkNodePolicy` object, and then save the YAML in the `sriov-node-network-policy.yaml` file:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: sriovnetwork.openshift.io/v1
kind: SriovNetworkNodePolicy
metadata:
 name: sriovnic
 namespace: openshift-sriov-network-operator
spec:
 deviceType: netdevice <1>

>  isRdma: false

Reviewer 2: isRdma true for mellanox

Author: Yes you are correct

      {"name": "tap-one", "interface": "ext0", "namespace": "test-namespace"}]'
spec:
  nodeSelector:
    kubernetes.io/hostname: "worker-1"
  securityContext:
    seccompProfile:
      type: RuntimeDefault
  containers:
  - name: testpmd
    image: <DPDK_image> <2>
    securityContext:
      capabilities:
        drop: ["ALL"] <3>
        add: <4>
          - IPC_LOCK
          - SYS_RESOURCE
          - NET_RAW #for mlx only <5>
          - NET_ADMIN
      fsGroup: 801 <6>
      runAsUser: 1001 <7>
      runAsGroup: 1001 <8>
      privileged: false <9>
      allowPrivilegeEscalation: true <10>
      runAsNonRoot: true <11>
    volumeMounts:
    - mountPath: /dev/hugepages <12>
      name: hugepage
    resources:
      limits:
        openshift.io/mlxnics: "1" <13>
        memory: "1Gi"
        cpu: "4" <14>
        hugepages-1Gi: "4Gi" <15>
      requests:
        openshift.io/mlxnics: "1"
        memory: "1Gi"
        cpu: "4"
        hugepages-1Gi: "4Gi"
    command: ["sleep", "infinity"]
  runtimeClassName: performance-cnf-performanceprofile <16>
  volumes:
  - name: hugepage
    emptyDir:
      medium: HugePages
----

> +

Reviewer 2: have you verified all yaml definitions @kononovn? Everything that we mention here should work.

Author: Hoping @kononovn will verify these steps as documented.

--
<1> Specify the same `target_namespace` where the `SriovNetwork` object `intel-dpdk-network` is created. If you want to create the pod in a different namespace, change `target_namespace` in both the `Pod` spec and the `SriovNetwork` object.
<2> Specify the DPDK image which includes your application and the DPDK library used by application.
<3> Dropping all capabilities (`ALL`) from the container's securityContext means that the container will not have any special privileges beyond what is necessary for normal operation.
<4> Specify additional capabilities required by the application inside the container for hugepage allocation, system resource allocation, and network interface access the Virtual Function I/O (VFIO) device.
<5> Mellanox network interface controller (NIC) requires the `NET_RAW` capability.
<6> Defines the group ID (GID) that the pod's containers use to access shared volumes' file systems. This needs to be set to 801 to access the VFIO device.
+
[NOTE]
====

> Alternatively add the group 801 to the non-root user in the image. The user 1001(`dpdk-user`) in `registry.redhat.io/openshift4/dpdk-base-rhel8` has this group added.

Reviewer 2: this should be in bullet 6. Together. So, mention that instead of using this parameter (fsGroup), they can do the following .... User is "default" not "dpdk-user."

+
[NOTE]
====
Modify the configuration of your DPDK application to run with user ID `1001` and group ID `1001`. This can be achieved through different approaches depending on the specific requirements and configuration options of your DPDK application.
====
+
<16> If your performance profile is not named `cnf-performance profile`, replace that string with the correct performance profile name.
--
+
. Create the DPDK pod by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create -f dpdk-pod-rootless.yaml
----

. Verify that the pod is created by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get pod
----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
NAME       READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
dpdk-app   1/1     Running   0          4m36s
----

. Get detailed information about the `dpdk-app` within the `test-namespace` by running the following command::
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc describe pods dpdk-app -n test-namespace
----

> +

Reviewer 2: we should add a section with the command to receive and forward traffic to the tap using dpdk-testpmd. @kononovn, can you please share the command here?

Author: I will have to defer to @kononovn on this.
